---
layout: page

Author: Kyle Alexander
Title: Docker on Windows with docker-machine

Category: Environments
Tags: [Docker, Jekyll, Windows, Chocolatey, VirtualBox]

permalink: /draft/
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# Docker from scratch on Windows Home

## A walkthrough on getting docker set up from the command line without Docker For Windows

I have always liked the idea of using containers where ever possible but my most recent laptop purchases have all arrived installed with windows home and as some might know the lovely Docker for windows needs 64 bit pro or better. I knew that <!--more-->docker toolbox existed but docker themselves mark it as a legacy solution and so I was curious as to whether there is a more DIY solution to getting docker working and functional on systems that cant use Docker for windows.

After a quick search I came across [This article](https://golb.hplar.ch/2019/01/docker-on-windows10-home-scratch.html) which explains how to use the docker-machine and virtual box to get started. Give the article a read since it covers compose and Kubernetes which this will not. I used the initial docker material in the article to get started myself but I wanted a more seamless way to get everything set up.

If you're on Windows and haven't used Chocolatey or some other package manager then go check it out at [https://chocolatey.org/](https://chocolatey.org/). In a nutshell its a command line package manager for windows. As a bonus for this walkthrough it also contains packages for everything we need to get started. 

That would be
- docker-cli
- docker-machine
- virtualbox

```
choco install docker-cli
choco install docker-machine
choco install virtualbox
```

If you've never docker or VirtualBox then here is a quick summary of each package. The docker-cli does what is says on the tin and is the main tool for running and managing containers. Docker-machine is a command line tool by docker to manage other computers. It is used to set up hosts for the core docker daemon. In our case we are using to create and manage(mostly) a guest machine inside VirtualBox. VirtualBox is software for creating and managing virtual machines. docker-machine only utilizes a small amount VirtualBox's capabilities and this article only touches on a subset of that. If you want to learn all there is about VBox then head to [https://www.virtualbox.org/](https://www.virtualbox.org/).

### Docker

It might be a bit late at this point but from here on out you'll need to know about the basic docker concepts like containers, images, volumes, and ports(I mean -p). If any of that is foreign to you then its well worth going through the [Docker Get Started Guide](https://docs.docker.com/get-started/).

Anyway for the purpose of the rest of this I will be using the Jekyll image. For those who don't know Jekyll is a static site builder on ruby that this whole site is built on. For the purposes of the article you only need to know that Jekyll has the following functionality 

- Jekyll new *projectName* - Creates a new Jekyll site in the folder *projectName* with a scaffolded welcome page and post
- Jekyll build - Takes an existing projects and generates a new set of html files ready for hosting
- Jekyll serve - Build and creates a static host for the project that can be viewed as a website (this is for development. use build and host statically for production)

### Now we get started

```
docker-machine create -d "virtualbox" default
```

This will create a Virtual Machine (a VM) using virtual box with the name default. default is a nice name as the docker-machine cli assumes we are operating on this machine for most of its operations.

As we have the VM between us and the docker containers we need to make any folders that we will use a docker volumes shared folders between our machine and the VM so everything is synced. For this we can use

```
vboxmanage sharedfolder add default --name dockermnt --hostpath "\\?\c:\dockermnt" --automount
```

This will create a single shared folder at the root of both machines called dockermnt. I know people will ask why the question mark and to be honest I don't know but it matches the folder share created by default if you look the VM settings in VirtualBox. I assume it has to do with how Unix and Windows path structures are mapped to one another. This is not all though as the default user for docker operations does not have access to the dockermnt folder.

```
docker-machine ssh
sudo su
chown -R docker /dockermnt
exit
exit
```

This gives any operations performed by docker permissions to write into the folder. This is a bonus as most images need to write to the VM to create persistence for the containers.

Before we can use the docker client to mess with containers we need to make sure it is is pointing at the VM as the docker host so any instructions are executed in the VM where the docker daemon is running.

```
docker-machine env
```

This will print the a collections of instructions to set the environment for the docker cli. I would advise using PowerShell and running

```
docker-machine env | Invoke-Expression
```

This will evaluate the output and set up the variables automatically.

Now we can run

```
docker run --rm -v="/dockermnt/jekyll:/srv/jekyll" -it jekyll/jekyll jekyll new dockertest
```