---
layout: page
Class: post-content

Title: Measuring SOLID
Author: Kyle Alexander

Category: Code Design
Tags: [SOLID, OOP]

#permalink: /draft/
visible: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# SOLID and Measuring Cleanliness 

## What is it and how do we know we're doing it properly
So this is a look at what SOLID is and as the title suggests how to check its being used properly. The second part is important because in my opinion the SOLID principles are often left behind in the academic side of software development. You can pretty much <!--more-->ask anyone who has been in the industry for a while and most people will be able to reel the principles and their definitions off without really thinking about it. That understanding is a necessary baseline but applying the principles in practice when either writing, designing or reviewing code seems to be something that's not nearly as common and is far more difficult. With that in mind this article is going to run through the five principles as in depth as I know but also it will hopefully contain methods that I think are good for measuring whether code is agreeing with the principles. The aim of the ideas mentioned below is to take what is quite an abstract set of concepts(SOLID) and provide much more easily recognisable patterns in the object oriented world that make catching non SOLID code easier. 

There will be opinions in here so do with them what you will.

### SOLID
A quick overview of the five principles of SOLID if this is the first time you've seen it. The principles were first outlined by Robert Martin in [Design Principles and Design Patterns](https://web.archive.org/web/20150906155800/http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/Principles_and_Patterns.pdf). They are basically a set of principles for minimising code rot by taking measures to isolate the impact of any requirement changes on the code base. They combine low class and unit coupling with high in-class cohesiveness to make implementing changes as easy as possible while keeping the chance of causing issues in the existing code as low as possible.

When done well the aim is the following
- When adding business value you only need to add code. This means writing new classes and systems. This usually comes with a very small change to an existing system to add the new system to an existing workflow.
- When changing a single piece of business behaviour you only need to change one class.
- When removing functionality you only need to delete or remove code from configuration. Like the first point this usually involves also a small change to remove the item from a workflow.

> It is possible to avoid the configuration changes if a plugin architecture is used that dynamically loads types based on attribute decorators or implemented contracts.
{: .green }

<https://stackoverflow.com/questions/607178/how-enumerate-all-classes-with-custom-class-attribute>
```
static IEnumerable<Type> GetTypesWithHelpAttribute(Assembly assembly) {
    foreach(Type type in assembly.GetTypes()) {
        if (type.GetCustomAttributes(typeof(HelpAttribute), true).Length > 0) {
            yield return type;
        }
    }
}
```

### Foreword On Cohesiveness and Coupling

Before we jump into to each principal individually its worth first laying down what I mean when I refer to decoupling and cohesiveness as these concepts are important when it comes to writing good SOLID code.

A basic overview is that coupling is how resistant a class is to the changes of other classes and cohesiveness is how well a classes state is encapsulated. 

Coupling between classes is a measurement of how much those classes know about each other and how resistant one is to the change of the other. If every time you change some functionality in Class A you also have to head over to Class B and change something to line up then Class B is highly coupled to Class A. A certain amount of coupling is always required as classes have to talk to each other in some way for any system to work. However this coupling should be consciously minimised otherwise later on when you have to make changes to a class you also run round the system making changes to a lot of other classes risking bugs and wasting developer time and effort. Decoupling usually takes the form of creating well segregated interfaces to make sure a class only depends on the exact method signatures it calls. Also bundling method parameters into models so parameters can be changed without impacting the method signatures that they are passed through to.

Cohesiveness within a class is how well that class uses its internal state. Ideal cohesiveness within a class is every method uses every field. High cohesiveness is preferable as it tends to also help with minimising coupling. If all the operations that use a particular set of data are grouped then it means less parameters need to be passed between classes and this reduces coupling. High cohesiveness also makes for better code readability and discoverability. A developer can discover the current capabilities of what the system can do with particular data as well as knowing where to put any new capabilities.

In the end the aim is to create systems which encapsulate the data they operate on so only the minimal amount needs to be provided to keep the operations dynamic.

With that said
Here are my thoughts on the five parts of SOLID.

### S
The S stands for the Single Responsibility principle and is arguably the corner stone of the five principles.

> Every Software Entity should have exactly one reason to change.
{: .green }

The single responsibility principle under pins most of the other principles and is in my opinion the most difficult to get right but also the most important to understand. It is built around high decoupling and equally high cohesiveness with the intention of making sure a single unit in our system performs one task and has one reason to change. The key to understanding this principle is in understanding the scope of a "reason to change". I think a good way to measure this is based on defining what we don't want.

- More than one responsibility - There are two or more distinct collections of methods in this class and they operate on either completely exclusive fields or there is very little crossover in field usage. This is usually noticeable if there is a class that doesn't map to any business concept and it will have a large name that consists of two unrelated things slapped together. This is common when coupling solution and problem domain concerns. An example would be a CarList class that is a UI component coupling business logic about what a car is to solution logic about how it is rendered. **A good check is to see what percentage of methods fields in a class are used for. You want to to aim for a high average by splitting methods and there fields into other classes and passing fields used in common through**
- Partial Responsibility -  This happens if you have multiple classes that always change together. This is not always obvious but consider having a ValueObject/POCO. These classes usually lead to poor responsibility as many classes might use a field on this POCO. This is high coupling as many classes all will need to be changed if this field is changed, it is an example of the feature envy anti pattern and breaks single responsibility. If 3 methods all throughout your system must change whenever you change a field in this POCO then the methods should all be in the same class. This means changes to the fields do not have an impact outside of the class. **A good check is to find methods with large numbers of parameters as they rely on non class state which comes from somewhere it shouldn't. Gets and Sets can be common signs of the feature envy anti pattern and as such break the single responsibility principle.**

Single responsibility is about defining a middle ground between having classes that have more than one responsibility and having multiple classes that have the same responsibility.

### O

The O stands for the Open/Closed principle.

> Software Entities should be open for extension but closed for modification.
{: .green }

The Open/Closed principle is about creating a system that can have features added to it without having to modify it. The closed aspect of the principle refers to the fact that an existing system is closed because it could be used by other systems(i.e. it is in deployment). The open aspect refers to the fact that the system is still extensible and features can be added. Ultimately the aim for the open closed principle is to be able to add behaviour to a system without having to rebuild, recompile or redeploy the existing system. Achieving this aim system wide pretty much requires the adoption of a plugin based architecture throughout.

However it is possible to gain the benefits of designing code adherent to the open closed principle in smaller units such as classes without having to design and write a full blown plugin system. A large part of this is being dependent on contracts and not implementations and then having the mapping of abstraction to implementation deferred to another assembly. This would mean that other implementations can be used to change behaviour and only the assembly responsible for the configuration is needed to be redeployed. Furthermore this idea can be used along side the decorator pattern to add new functionality without having to redeploy anything but the configuration assembly and the assembly containing the decorator.

Another part of the open closed principle and plugin architecture that can be implemented on a smaller scale for maintainability benefits is the concept of designing with subscribable events. This applies to when services call other services to notify them functionality has been performed. For example Service A changes some application state and then calls Service B to cause a re render. This doesn't scale very well because when a new service also needs to do something when the state changes you need to modify the original service. By designing these notification style use cases as events up front you allow new functionality to be added without having to touch the existing system at all. This is the basis of the observer pattern and by consciously looking for places where this pattern is appropriate you can keep your system open for extension and for free you would be developing an extensive event based api that would be ready for a migration to a plugin architecture.

**Violations of the Open/Closed Principle are usually spotted first as violation of other principles. For instance dependencies on concrete classes are violations of the open part of the principle but would probably be seen more obviously as violations of dependency inversion. Regarding the observer pattern and event structure there will be varying opinions on this as it could be considered premature optimisation. This is fair but and in this case seeing a code change that adds the second call is where the violation would exist**

```CSharp
class ServiceA
{
    public void Update(Data a)
    {
        this.repository.Set(a);

        PostUpdate();
    }

    public void PostUpdate()
    {
        this.ServiceB.DataUpdated();
        this.ServiceC.DataUpdated(); //The addition of this call would be considered the violation as it this point you should be using an observer or in CSharp's case potentially an Event
    }
}
```
> Just a note here that this principle makes a lot more sense if you are strict about developing the whole system in a plugin style. In that Scenario these events become a plugins way of interacting with the core system alongside a standard API. In that case it is important to make sure that the system exposes a extensive set of events otherwise plugins will have to implement hacks and workarounds because your core system is not firing an event that the plugin needs and the it ends up subscribed to an event that is either at the slightly wrong time or doesn't have the right data passed to it. 
{: .green }


### L

The L stands for the Liskov Substitution Principle.

> Sub types of a Software Entity must be able to replace usages of it without impacting the correctness of the program. 
{: .green }

The Liskov Substitution Principle is one of the easier principles to define and catch violations of as it very unambiguous. It states that when classes/interfaces are inheriting from one another the child must adhere to certain rules to make sure it can be used as an implementation of the parent without risking correctness of the system.

- The Child must accept parameters that are similar or more abstract than the parent. This is so users can pass parameters to the abstraction with the guarantee that all implementers can handle the parameter. eg if an abstraction accepts a positive integer the implementation cannot require something more specific like an even number because then users of the abstraction would need to know if that particular implementation is being used to avoid passing an invalid parameters (an odd number).
- The Child must return values that are similar or more concrete/specific than the parent. This is so users of the abstraction are always receiving something that conforms to the contract of the abstraction and can use it without error. eg if an abstraction contains a method signature the implementation should not omit this method(or throw a not implemented error) as users of the abstraction should be able to call the implementation with no fear of lack of implementation.

In most languages this principle is enforced through type safety in the language. However a common gotcha is with regards to nulls. 

This is my opinion but to strongly adhere to this principle it is important to be explicit about whether abstraction can return null. If the abstraction is returning an instance or null then the implementation can return null. However if it is not explicit that the abstraction can return null then implementations should not return null. It can be argued that null is an implicit option for any reference type but my view is that this is an important case to be explicit as it avoids the requirement of null checked operations slowly making their way through the code and harming the readability and simplicity of the system.

**Violations here are usually telegraphed with a type downcast in type safe languages. It becomes harder to catch violations in non typed languages as the abstraction has nowhere to define what its contract is with regards to parameters and return types. You have to check each implementation to realistically find a violation. Also violations can slip through the net when the contract is not enforced properly. For instance if an abstraction requires a number above 10 but accepts a uint its very difficult to spot violations as the only place the 'above 10' rule exists is in the original programmers head or a doc. This is fixed by fixing the primitive obsession antipattern present and using an object that wraps an int and enforces this 'above 10' logic so the rule is in code**

### I

The I stands for the Interface segregation principle.

> No Software Entity should depend on functionality it does not use.
{: .green }

Interface Segregation is about defining your contracts based on usage and not implementation. The aim is to have classes depend on interfaces that define only the functionality that is relevant to the classes functionality. The most common way to diagnose violations of this principle is with unit tests as you will need to mock more than what is necessary for the tests. Interface Segregation is important for decoupling software and maintaining single responsibility throughout your classes.

Interface segregation is important as low coupling required the thinnest possible contracts between your systems components. Large contracts make it difficult to actually swap out implementations of an interface when you want to add or change behaviour. It is important to note that interface segregation is similar to single responsibility in that you need to find a middle ground. One method per interface is not a solution as you'll end up with classes that have far too many dependencies injected into it that make it incredibly cumbersome to test.

Method usage on the interface should not be enforced to be a strict 100% when looking at what a class uses. For instance consider a renderer interface, A class may not use every different render method on the interface but rendering things is relevant to the classes functionality and so a single interface works here. **If you see a lot of overlap between interfaces with regard to methods they define its entirely possible these interfaces should be grouped**.

**Interface Segregation is a pretty easy one to spot as you'll have classes that depend on functionality irrelevant to their purpose. It is also noticeable if you have a class consistently using multiple interfaces that are actually using the same underlying concrete implementation. in this scenario it is worth considering grouping the interfaces.**

### D

The D stands for the Dependency Inversion principle.

> Software Entities should depend on abstractions not implementations.
{: .green }

The dependency inversion principle is based on the simple idea that no module/class needs to know how another module/class does the things it does. They only ever need to know what it does and this is achieved by using abstractions such as interfaces, abstract classes and call backs. Catching Violations of this principle are relatively simple and **can be found when a type is dependent on another concrete type**. Fixes are also relatively simple and involve creating an abstraction that the concrete type extends and referencing it by this abstraction instead where necessary.

There can be more subtle violations of this principle that can arise when classes are dependent on the abstraction but run logic that assumes a particular concrete class is in use. For instance Class A extends Interface I and Class B uses Class A but abstracted behind the interface. This is all fine but a violation can occur if for instance Class A makes some change to the application state in its implementation and Class B relies on this change being made to function correctly. In this case syntactically there is no violation but Class B is relying that the concrete type behind the interface is Class A and so the interface is not really doing anything and is just there to cheat a linter(that linter maybe a person). In these more complex cases it is important to look at the usage of the interface and think about the whether the interaction makes sense if a stub is used (Unit testing is a good way to find these violations as the tests will become considerably more complex to deal with the assumed behaviour).

### Closing Word

There has been a lot of writing here so if you didn't skip ahead and have read everything up to this thank you and I hope you learnt at least a little something from my rambling. 